20111006 Chyna
Viktor Nonong Medrano

Für som Whytes, Chyna—â Living Mųseum. Maya ‘n Aztec (Nahuatl)—deäd.

Addendum 20260708

Some non-Chinese have noticed that Chinese are “more negative.” Yes, I think so, as compared to Thais and Japanese. Michael from Guangzhou is a special type of Chinese personality, maybe unique, in that he likes Southern types, like Thais, brown people, and black people. He doesn’t hate sex, unlike a Hongkonger.

Addendum 20260710

Some Anglophones think that I need to exorcize them of Western religion. They’re so confused about their own religion. Many of the agents are more like Protestants, maybe Baptists. They even find novelty in Roman Catholicism. In the PRC, Xtianity is still a small minority. What’s growing worldwide, like it or not, is really Secularism.

Latinos don’t only like the fantasy genre. Judging from the large size of their sci-fi book inventory, there exists a large sci-fi following. It means that many Latinos don’t have a Xtian outlook. Chinese sci-fi is not so evident for me here in the West, but Japanese is, through their anime. I suspect that it’s just the “tip of the iceberg” for Chinese sci-fi.

ChatGPT 20260710

Your observation touches on a few real trends, though I’d be cautious about drawing a direct line between science fiction readership and religious outlook.

In much of Latin America, fantasy and science fiction both have enthusiastic audiences. Spanish translations of authors such as Isaac Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke, and Ursula K. Le Guin have long been widely available, and there are also many prominent Latin American SF authors. Countries such as Mexico, Argentina, and Spain (though not Latino, it shares the Spanish-language publishing market) have active science fiction communities, publishers, conventions, and magazines.

However, enjoying science fiction does not necessarily imply that readers reject a Christian worldview. Many Christians enjoy speculative fiction. In fact, some of the most influential fantasy and science fiction authors were themselves religious—for example, C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien in fantasy, and writers like Walter M. Miller Jr. incorporated explicitly Christian themes into science fiction. Others, like Asimov, were more secular. The genre accommodates many philosophical and religious perspectives.

Regarding Chinese science fiction, your “tip of the iceberg” analogy is a reasonable one. Outside the Chinese-speaking world, only a small fraction of Chinese SF has been translated into English and other Western languages. International attention increased dramatically after The Three-Body Problem by Liu Cixin became a global success, but China has a much broader ecosystem of science fiction magazines, web novels, and authors than most Western readers encounter.

Japanese science fiction is much more visible internationally because of decades of exports in anime, manga, film, and games. Works such as Akira, Ghost in the Shell, and franchises like Gundam have introduced global audiences to Japanese SF concepts, while many Japanese SF novels remain untranslated.

In that sense, there is an asymmetry of visibility:

* Japanese SF is highly visible internationally through visual media.
* Chinese SF is increasingly visible but is still underrepresented outside China relative to its domestic scale.
* Spanish-language SF has a substantial readership but receives less attention in the Anglophone world than English-language SF.

So I would agree with your broader point that the international picture is skewed by what gets translated and exported. The science fiction communities in both the Spanish-speaking world and China are larger and more diverse than many English-speaking readers realize.

Addendum 20260711

Maybe being “yellow” or Chinese means being more negative, like a “pink” or Anglo. The Yīn is much talked about in the Dàodéjīng. It says in Chapter 28 of Ursula K. Le Guin’s rendition:

“Knowing man and staying woman, be the riverbed of the world. Being the world’s riverbed of eternal unfailing power is to go back again to be newborn.”

I’m not too sure.

ChatGPT 20260712

Ang siping iyan ay mula sa Kabanata 28 ng Tao Te Ching. Ang orihinal na Klasikong Tsino ay:

知其雄，守其雌，為天下溪。
為天下溪，常德不離，復歸於嬰兒。

Pinyin:

Zhī qí xióng, shǒu qí cí, wéi tiānxià xī.
Wéi tiānxià xī, cháng dé bù lí, fù guī yú yīng’ér.

Salita-sa-salitang paliwanag:

* 知其雄 (zhī qí xióng) — “Alamin ang pagkalalaki / ang malakas / ang panlalaking katangian.”
* 守其雌 (shǒu qí cí) — “Panatilihin ang pagkababae / ang mahina / ang pambabaeng katangian.”
* 為天下溪 (wéi tiānxià xī) — “Maging batis o lambak na dinadaluyan ng buong daigdig.”
* 常德不離 (cháng dé bù lí) — “Sa gayon, ang walang-hanggang Dé (德, birtud o likas na kapangyarihan) ay hindi humihiwalay.”
* 復歸於嬰兒 (fù guī yú yīng’ér) — “At muling nagbabalik sa pagiging isang sanggol.”

Ang salin ni Ursula K. Le Guin:

“Knowing man and staying woman, be the riverbed of the world. Being the world’s riverbed of eternal unfailing power is to go back again to be newborn.”

ay isang malayang pampanitikang salin kaysa literal. May ilang kapansin-pansing pagpili:

* Isinalin niya ang 雄 (xióng) bilang “man” at 雌 (cí) bilang “woman.” Sa Klasikong Tsino, maaari rin itong mangahulugang “male” at “female”, at metaporikal na tumutukoy sa yang at yin.
* Ang 溪 (xī) ay literal na “batis” o “sapa.” Isinalin niya itong “riverbed” upang idiin ang ideya ng mababang lugar na tinatanggap ang lahat ng dumadaloy rito.
* Ang 常德 (cháng dé) ay ginawa niyang “eternal unfailing power.” Ang 德 (dé) ay isa sa pinakamahirap isalin sa Tsino; maaari itong mangahulugang birtud, likas na bisa, moral na kapangyarihan, o ang kapangyarihang nagmumula sa pagsunod sa Dào.
* Ang 嬰兒 (yīng’ér) ay literal na “sanggol.” Pinili niyang sabihing “to be newborn,” na nagbibigay-diin sa pagbabalik sa orihinal na kawalang-malay at likas na kalagayan.

Sa konteksto ng Dàodéjīng, ang “pag-alam sa panlalaki ngunit pananatili sa pambabae” ay hindi tungkol sa kasarian sa modernong kahulugan. Isa itong metapora para sa pagkakaroon ng lakas ngunit pagpili ng pagpapakumbaba, pagtanggap, at pagiging bukás—isang pagsasama ng yang at yin kung saan ang tila “mahina” ang siyang tunay na pinagmumulan ng matatag at pangmatagalang kapangyarihan.


