20241208 Grokenspiel
Viktor Nonong Medrano

2024-12-08
Understanding reality is challenging. Most of my life has dealt with this notion, as well as wading in the ocean of irreality in the form of speculative fiction, specifically sci-fi and fantasy. Elon Musk has suggestions: In one's latter years, maybe one should really try to understand reality. For many, this notion means Science and Buddhism. He knows that I can do it. For me, lately, I swing from Buddhism-Animism to Buddhism-Gnosticism and back. My belief in lust leads me sometimes to Hinduism. My Animistic tendencies lead me to Shintō-Dào, sometimes. Spiritually, I am an eclectic. But all throughout has been Science. I know that "women" would find it difficult to understand my stance.

Incidentally, Elon Musk insinuates that Science is more important than Art. As Japanese heavily influence me, Art plays a major role in my everyday life. But yes, Science is more important than Art. With Science, we can manipulate our environment to change, perhaps, for the better. Again, I think that "women" would find this notion difficult to accept.

Naiisip ko namang kung bakit parang mas mayaman ang mga Hapones at Europeo sa iba ay dahil talagang maarte sila. Ang iniisip ba'y ang kontrasto ng Hapones o Europeo sa Amerikano? Kung iisipin ang utak, ang kaliwa ay rasyonal at ang kanan ay kreatibo.

All in all, I would say that I do already have so much art: my book collections, my curio collections, my T-shirt collections, my hat collections, my graphic file collections, my music collections, and so on. It is time that I quantify the extent of my collections and say that "enough is enough."

2024-12-09
Japanese civilization optimizes the balance between Science and Art. They excel in both these things.

Like I, Elon Musk and many others grew up with sci-fi and fantasy, so many of us pursued the tech sector. What "women" should realize is that there is "science fact" versus "science fiction."

I talked to Greg the Filipino this morning in Starbucks café. Greg was drinking Mocha and I a Passion Tango iced tea. I saw that seemingly "Greek" muscleman again, in and out of the café with his coffee. "Ang laki! (So big!)," I said to Greg. His body is like a Greek god sculpture. (I am not really sure if he is Greek, but I heard him talking in his cellphone in a language that sounded Greek to me.) I took my second walk in the grey-sky morning: At Yummy Slice pizzeria, Sachet the Gujarati vendor and Tharsan the Sri Lankan owner were there, as I was drinking my grey-can Diet Coke. At the Subway sandwitcheria, I got a Turkey Ranch "Snackwich" with spinach, tomatoes, fried onions, cucumbers, and honey mustard sauce. Simran the Punjabi Sikh was my vendor. She talked about the coming Lohri Festival in January for Punjabis. It has to do with celebrating with bonfires and honouring childbirth. I greeted Don the head-shaven white man at Starbucks café, where I was eating almonds.

It is easy for Elon Musk to say that one could concentrate on "reality." With his billions of credits, he could convert his imagination into reality: a city on Mars, an army of robots, self-driving automobiles, etc. But for us ordinary people with minimal finances, we must turn to "irreality." So, we cannot forgo sci-fi and fantasy. They are our "drugs" of choice.

Many opine that I am like a Red Indian. It started long ago when I lived in the Martianesque red-soil fields of Don José Heights in Quezon City in the Philippines. My cousins, my brother, and I had adventures in that wilderness. Tall yellow-green grasses that we called "talahib" grew in the red soil. Purple vines with heart-shaped leaves grew around the treed areas.

In the cloudy, yet sunny, afternoon was my third walk of the day, here on Lulu Island. I was at Yummy Slice pizzeria to drink a grey-can Diet Coke. I exercised with my hand grip strengthener at my table. Sachet the Gujarati and Navjot the Punjabi were the vendors.  There were throngs of parents with their Eurasian kids, eating or ordering pizza. I visited Kin's Farm Market. The radio was playing Xmas songs. Leo, the Cantonese vendor who speaks also Mandarin, exclaimed, "Viktor, bā bái!" The fragrance of baked Japanese sweet potato, "yaki-imo" in Japanese, "rostita batato" in Esperanto, was tempting. There was a metallic rectangular oven with heated stones inside. The colourful fruits enthralled me. The durian was still so dear!

2024-12-10
With the financial Gigantor that Elon Musk has, he does not really try to promote jealousy: He is very rich and very smart. He tries to imbue in others the liking of futurology. He is like a shepherd, but not only for techies. We both believe in Mars.