20250127 Firsthand
Viktor Nonong Medrano

I think that "women" just want to restrict the scope of discussions. I cannot really talk about the things about which I really want to talk. There is at least one thing that I do want to say that may irk "women": Alexander (al_ex_an_der), an intellectual German in the Tatoeba forum many years ago, warned me about astronomy. He hinted that it could cause frustration because one cannot know "firsthand" what it would be like on Luna, Mars, and so forth, because humans do not have the technology, resources, finances, and so on, yet, despite that we currently do have uncrewed space probes surveying different parts of outer space, including solid celestial objects. He hinted that it would be better to concentrate on linguistics. This problem compounds the reality of the people of this world not being too "space-savvy." Elon Musk talks about a "multiplanetary civilization" of future humankind. I admire that he says it. It makes more people aware.

There is another thing that may irk "women": Gary the Cantonese and I share the experience of having watched the iconic movie The Matrix. The movie maybe alludes to the Buddhist "Māyā"—the Illusion that we think is "reality"—and true reality is hidden. What I gather from AI chats is that this Illusion could stretch the width of the whole multiverse, including, of course, this Earth. Tied to this Illusion is the thought about Gnosticism, to which Grandma Taiwan at Kin's Farm Market alludes. This Illusion would be this materialistic world which one deems as "intrinsically malevolent, evil." We do not know if the whole multiverse would have this characteristic. Are there universes in the multiverse which are more like Heavens?

Dr. Au was an astronomy enthusiast when he was alive. He framed photos, including in his office, of celestial objects observed by advanced telescopes. Was he, like my father Frank, thinking that he would be reborn elsewhere in the universe or multiverse? The things we chitchatted about was just a "tip of the iceberg" about which he might have been really thinking deeply.

Japanese know that there is "wabi-sabi" in outer space. Nipponjin, Japanoids, like I admire the rugged surface features of other worlds, the wispiness of nebulae, the darkness of space itself, et cetera. Such sentiment is too difficult to explain to Westerners.