20260513 Karen’s Snack
Viktor Nonong Medrano

Cherry blossom season has already gone poof! In the still cloudy-sunny evening, on my way to Tim Hortons café, I see my neighbour Sherman the Cantonese having just trimmed his hedges and having just adjusted the video camera surveillance system. At the café, I see Karen the Hokkien-speaking Philippine-born having Iced Milk Coffee. We first greet in Tagalog: “Kamusta?” “Okey naman!” Then, we switch to English. She has two books with her: one about back pain and the other about poverty in Canadian provinces. At first, when I hear her say “provinces,” I think that it is about rural Philippines, but it’s about here Canada. Karen has long blackish hair. I’m drinking a Raspberry Zero Lime Sparkling Quencher. It’s transparent pink! There’s a slice of frozen lime! I first sit near the window at the long table, then I move to my favourite spot where I can lean against the wall. Karen’s occupation is e-commerce copyrighting. At the end, Karen is eating Sea Salt Potato Wedges. Both Karen and I have Hokkien and Spanish ancestries. In the neighbourhood, I know another Chinese-Filipino, who is Patrick. He sometimes visits the café. Both Karen and Patrick have robust physiques.

Later in the evening, I return to the café. In my cardigan jacket’s pocket are three stubby pinkish red cylinders of Haw Flakes. I offer one to Ming the Hongkonger, but he declines, saying that he has many at home. He says that these disk-shaped flakes taste better than the ball-shaped ones, which I’ve never seen. Both Ming and I grew up with Haw Flakes as kids. I offer a stubby cylinder to Hamid the Iranian, and he accepts, wondering if the candy is “Filipino” or “Chinese.” Haws are small, bright red berries from the Hawthorn tree in China. At the café, I’m drinking Extra-Oat-Milk Iced Coffee, whilst munching on Haw Flakes. “Para kang may sando!” (It looks like you have a sleeveless shirt on!), says Ming in Tagalog, as he exits. I’m wearing a sleeveless mesh army-green jacket under my hooded red, white, and black cardigan jacket. “Sando” is Japanese for sandwich, like a “furūtsu sando”—a fruit cream sandwich!
